# Stream Monitoring Habiata Data Exchange Specifications 
Stream Monitoring Habitat Data Exchange Specifications is a standard for exchanging metric-level habitat data based on the Darwin Core principles. 

The stream habitat data exchange specifications are structured based on the simple Darwin Core standard. Using data from four federal stream habitat monitoring programs as a model, we outline the elements needed to share or integrate metrics from stream habitat data sets. We included core dataset information, location information, data collection event information, and individual metrics data. We follow the recommend Darwin Core star database schema due to how one location relates to multiple events, and programs produce numerous metrics at a single event [Figure 1](Figures/StructureofStreamHabitatData.png). The approach is flexible enough to be adapted later to support the transfer of other data types such as macroinvertebrate counts or riparian vegetation.

We utilize the Darwin Core classes Record-level, Location, Occurrence, and Measurement or Fact[Figure 2](Figures/StructureOfDarwinCoreForHabitatMetrics.png). Class in Darwin Core is the title for a group of terms. Record-level class documents information about each dataset and is linked to Location using the DatasetID. Location class document the location and metadata about that location; it is associated with a sampling event using the LocationID. Multiple events can be related to one location—the Event class documents the data collection event and metadata about the sampling event. The event is linked to the specific metric using the EventID. The Measurement Or Fact class documents the metrics and metadata about each metric. At each event, programs collet multiple measurements, producing numerous metrics. To promote transparent and consistent metadata, we facilitated a process to describe a standard vocabulary defining the metrics that can be shared using these data exchange specifications. 

# Background 
Streams are critical to fish, aquatic community structure, and overall watershed health. State, Federal and Tribal entities collect in-stream habitat data to assess the resources' status and trends unique to their management questions.  Climate change, urbanization, and multi-use land management have made it necessary to determine the resources' quality and trends across jurisdictional boundaries using information from multiple collection efforts (Katz et al. 2012). It is not straightforward to combine data from various monitoring programs due to differences in response and survey (spatial and temporal) designs and data management practices. Additionally, data produced by these programs are not always findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) (Wilkinson et al. 2016).  There is no centralized repository or data dictionary for this type of information.  A standard theory in data science states researchers spend 80% of their time organizing, fixing mistakes, and cleaning data, leaving only 20% of their time to analyze data (Mons 2020).   Well-established rules for integrating and sharing stream habitat data from multiple sources will decrease the time spent finding and organizing data providing accurate and timely information for building indicators, completing analysis, and making decisions.  Over the last few months, PNAMP has facilitated a working group to review the response design, specifically the metrics and metadata from four federal stream habitat monitoring programs, to create a process for combining metric level stream habitat data. 

To make stream habitat data available, data exchange specifications are needed, guidelines, and rules for using and combining information. Rigorous data exchange specifications support reuse, promote interoperability, and reduce data integration costs (Morris and Frechette 2008, Hamm 2019). We modeled this data exchange specification for stream habitat data on the Darwin Core principles for exchanging biological data. Darwin Core provides terms and schema for integrating and exchanging biodiversity information (Wieczorek 2012), and it is highly flexible and adapted for many types of information.  
